WIP: Monitoring (#36)
NickCraver/nickcraver.github.com: blog/_posts/2018-11-29-stack-overflow-how-we-do-monitoring.markdown

We've debated changing this a few times, but the reality is the home page checks things we may not otherwise check, and a holistic check is important.
By this I mean, "If users hit the same page, would it work?"
If we made a health check that hit the database and some caches and sanity checked the big things that we know need to be online, that's great and it's way better than nothing.
But let's say we put a bug in the code and a cache that doesn't even seem that important doesn't reload right and it turns out it was needed to render the top bar for all users.
It's now breaking every page.
A health check route running some code wouldn't trigger, but just the act of loading the master view ensures a huge number of dependencies are evaluated and working for the check.

If you're curious, that's not a hypothetical.
You know that little dot on the review queue that indicates a lot of items currently in queue?
Yeah...fun Tuesday.

We also have health checks inside libraries.
The simplest manifestation of this is a [heartbeat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heartbeat_(computing)).

> This is something that for example [StackExchage.Redis](https://github.com/StackExchange/StackExchange.Redis) uses to routinely check if the socket connection to Redis is active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is something that for example [StackExchange.Redis](https://github.com/StackExchange/StackExchange.Redis) uses to routinely check if the socket connection to Redis is active.
```

The Microsoft .NET team has been working on [a unified way to do health checks in ASP.NET Core](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/microservices-architecture/implement-resilient-applications/monitor-app-health), but I'm not sure if we'll go that way or not.
I hope we can provide some ideas and unify things there when we get to it...more thoughts on that towards the end.

#### Health Checks: httpUnit

An internal tool (again, open sourced!) is [httpUnit][GH.httpUnit].
It's a fairly simple-to-use tool we use to check endpoints for compliance.
Does this URL return the status code we expect?
How about some text to check for?
Is the certificate valid? (We couldn't connect if it isn't.)
Does the firewall allow the rule?

By having something continually checking this and feeding into alerts when it fails, we can quickly identify issues, especially those from invalid config changes to the infrastructure.
We can also readily test new configurations or infrastructure, firewall rules, etc. before user load is applied.
For more details, see [the GitHub README][GH.httpUnit].

#### Health Checks: Fastly

> If we zoom out fom the data center, we need to see what's hitting us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we zoom out from the data center, we need to see what's hitting us.
```

We could get a bunch of nodes on a bunch of providers and monitor things with lots of set up and configuration...or we could just pay someone many orders of magnitude less money to outsource it.
We use [Pingdom](https://www.pingdom.com/) for this.
When things go down, it alerts us.

#### Metrics

What are metrics? They can take a few forms, but for us they're tagged [time series data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_series).
In short, this means you have a name, a timestamp, a value, and in our case, some tags.
For example, a single entry looks like:

- Name: `dotnet.memory.gc_collections`
- Time: `2018-01-01 18:30:00` (Of course it's UTC, we're not barbarians.)
- Value: `129,389,139`
- Tags: Server: `NY-WEB01`, Application: `StackExchange-Network`

The value in an entry can also take a few forms, but the general case is counters.
Counters report an ever-increasing value (often reset to `0` on restarts and such though).
By taking the difference in value over time, you can find out the value delta in that window.
For example, if we had 129,389,039 ten minutes before, we know that process on that server in those ten minutes ran 100 Gen 0 garbage collection passes.

> Another case is just reporting an absolute point-in-time value, for example "This GPU is currenly 87°".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another case is just reporting an absolute point-in-time value, for example "This GPU is currently 87°".
```

If you did, awesome.
A lot of people don't think that way until one day when it matters.
But it's always important.

It's critical to remember that how fast you render a webpage doesn't matter.
Yes, I said that.
It doesn't matter, not directly anyway.
The only thing that matters is how fast users *think* your site is.
How fast does it *feel*?
This manifests in many ways on the client experience, from the initial painting of a page to when content blinks in (please don't blink or shift!), ads render, etc.

Things that factor in here are, for example, how long did it take to...
- Connect over TCP?  ([HTTP/3](https://daniel.haxx.se/blog/2018/11/11/http-3/) isn't here yet)
- Negotiate the TLS connection?
- Finish sending the request?
- Get the first byte?
- Get the last byte?
- Initially paint the page?
- Issue requests for resources in the page?
- Render all the things?
- Finish attaching JavaScript handlers?

...hmmm, good questions!
These are the things that matter to the user experience.
Our question pages render in 18ms.
I think that's awesome.
And I might even be biased.
...but it also doesn't mean crap to a user if it takes forever to get to them.

So, what can we do?

> Years back, I threw together a client timings pipline when the pieces we needed first became available in browsers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Years back, I threw together a client timings pipeline when the pieces we needed first became available in browsers.
```

For each background group, specific backend server, entire server, or entire tier, it also allows some control.
We can take a backend server out of rotation, or an entire backend down, or a web server out of all backends if we need to shut it down for emergency maintenance, etc.

![Redis]({{ site.contenturl }}SO-Monitoring/SO-Monitoring-Opserver-HAProxy-Control.png)

#### Opserver: FAQs

I get the same questions about Opserver routinely, so let's knock a few of them out:
- Opserver does **not** require a data store of any kind for itself (it's all config and in-memory state).
  - This may happen in the future to enhance functionality, but there are no plans to require anything.
- Only the dashboard tab and per-node view is powered by Bosun, Orion, or WMI - all other screens like SQL, Elastic, Redis, etc. have no dependency...Opserver monitors these directly.
- Authentication is both global and per-tab pluggable (who can view and who's an admin are separate), but built-in configuration is via groups and Active Directory is included.
  - On admin vs. viewer: A viewer gets a read-only view. For example, HAProxy controls wouldn't be shown.

> - All tabs are not requied--each is independent and only appears if configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All tabs are not required--each is independent and only appears if configured.
```

This may be a terrible idea, but it's a general one I have for Opserver (or any script really) to get a health reading and the *why* of a health reading.
If we lose another node, these `n` things break.
Or, we see the common cause of `n` health warnings.
By pointing at a few endpoints, we could get a tree view of everything.
Need to add more data for your use case? Sure!
It's JSON, so just inherit from the object and add more stuff as needed.
It's an easily extensible model. I think.
I need to take the time to build this...maybe it's full of problems.
Or maybe someone reading this will tell me it's already done (hey you!).

#### Bosun Next Steps

Bosun has largely been in maintenance mode due to a lack of resources and other priorities.
We haven't done as much as we'd like because we need to have the discussion on the best path forward.
Have other tools caught up and filled the gaps that caused us to build it in the first place?
Has SQL 2017 or 2019 already improved the queries we had issues with lowering the bar greatly?
We need to take some time and look at the landscape and evaluate what we want to do.
This is something we want to get into during Q1 2019.

> We know of some things we'd like to do, such as impoving the alert editing experience and some other UI areas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We know of some things we'd like to do, such as improving the alert editing experience and some other UI areas.
```

- Logs: Rich, detailed text and data but not awesome for alerting
- Metrics: Tagged numbers of data for telemetry--good for alerting, but lacking in detail
- Health Checks: Is it up? Is it down? Is it sideways? Very specific, often for alerting
- Profiling: Performance data from the application to see how long things are taking
- ...and other complex combinations for specific use cases that don't really fall into any one of these.

#### Logs

Let's talk about [logs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2C7mNr5WMjA). You can log almost anything!

- Info messages? Yep.
- Errors? Heck yeah!
- Traffic? Sure!
- Email? Careful, GDPR.
- Anything else? Well, I guess.

Sounds good. I can log whatever I want! What's the catch?
Well, it's a trade-off.
Have you ever run a program with tons of console output?
Run the same program without it? Goes faster, doesn't it?
Logging has a few costs.
First, you often need to allocate strings for the logging itself.
That's memory and garbage collection (for .NET and some other platforms).
When you're logging *somewhere*, that usually that means disk space.
If we're traversing a network (and to some degree locally), it also means bandwidth and latency.

> ...and I was just kidding about email and [GDPR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation)...**all of those are GDPR concerns**. Keep retention and compliance in mind when logging anything. It's another cost to consider.

Author: ```suggestion
...and I was just kidding about [GDPR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation) only being a concern for email...**GDPR is a concern for all of the above**. Keep retention and compliance in mind when logging anything. It's another cost to consider.
```

#### Logs: HAProxy

We also log a minimal summary of public HTTP requests (only top level...no cookies, no form data, etc.) that go through [HAProxy](https://www.haproxy.org/) (our load balancer) because when someone can't log in, an account gets merged, or any of a hundred other bug reports come in it's immensely valuable to go see what flow led them to disaster.
We do this in SQL Server via [clustered columnstore indexes](http://www.nikoport.com/columnstore/).
For the record, [Jarrod Dixon](https://twitter.com/jarrod_dixon) first suggested and started the HTTP logging about 8 years ago and we all told him he was an insane lunatic and it was a tremendous waste of resources.
Please no one tell him he was totally right.
A new per-month storage format will be coming soon, but that's another story.

In those requests, we use profiling [that we'll talk about shortly](#miniprofiler) and send headers to HAProxy with certain numbers.
HAProxy captures and strips those headers into the syslog row we forward for processing into SQL.
Those headers include:

- ASP.NET Overall Milliseconds (encompasses those below)

> - SQL Count & Milliseconds

Author: ```suggestion
- SQL Count (queries) & Milliseconds
```

> - Redis Count & Milliseconds

Author: ```suggestion
- Redis Count (hits) & Milliseconds
```

> - HTTP Count & Milliseconds

Author: ```suggestion
- HTTP Count (requests sent) & Milliseconds
```

> - Tag Engine Count & Milliseconds

Author: ```suggestion
- Tag Engine Count (queries) & Milliseconds
```

> - Elasticsearch Count & Milliseconds

Author: ```suggestion
- Elasticsearch Count (hits) & Milliseconds
```

The Microsoft .NET team has been working on [a unified way to do health checks in ASP.NET Core](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/microservices-architecture/implement-resilient-applications/monitor-app-health), but I'm not sure if we'll go that way or not.
I hope we can provide some ideas and unify things there when we get to it...more thoughts on that towards the end.

#### Health Checks: httpUnit

An internal tool (again, open sourced!) is [httpUnit][GH.httpUnit].
It's a fairly simple-to-use tool we use to check endpoints for compliance.
Does this URL return the status code we expect?
How about some text to check for?
Is the certificate valid? (We couldn't connect if it isn't.)
Does the firewall allow the rule?

By having something continually checking this and feeding into alerts when it fails, we can quickly identify issues, especially those from invalid config changes to the infrastructure.
We can also readily test new configurations or infrastructure, firewall rules, etc. before user load is applied.
For more details, see [the GitHub README][GH.httpUnit].

#### Health Checks: Fastly

If we zoom out from the data center, we need to see what's hitting us.

> That's [Fastly](https://www.fastly.com/).

Author: ```suggestion
That's usually our CDN & proxy: [Fastly](https://www.fastly.com/).
```

Fastly has a concept of [services](https://docs.fastly.com/guides/basic-setup/working-with-services), which are akin to HAProxy backends when you think about it like a load balancer.
Fastly also has [health checks](https://docs.fastly.com/guides/basic-configuration/working-with-health-checks) built in.
In each of our data centers, we have two sets of ISPs coming in for redundancy.
We can configure things in Fastly to optimize uptime here.

> Let's say our NY data center is primary at the moment, and CO is our backup (our default state).

Author: ```suggestion
Let's say our NY data center is primary at the moment, and CO is our backup.
```
